[THEME MUSIC]
>>WILLIAM HENRY: Hello.
I'm William Henry.
Welcome to "The Awakened Soul."
Have you ever
wondered if your soul
is from another star system?
Did you ever feel like Earth
is not your home planet?
If so, you may be a star seed.
Star seeds are beings who have
experienced life elsewhere
in the universe.
The term sounds really New Agey.
However, the concept has
a very ancient origin.
The Stoics of Greece
in the third century BC
are credited with
first discussing
the conception of our soul as
a divine spark, a divine seed,
seeded from the
stars, a star seed.
The apostle Paul used the
Stoic imagery of seeds
to explain the Resurrection
and Ascension of Jesus.
By taking a look at
these early beliefs,
we will gain greater
understanding
of today's ascension
teachings and open our path
to new, higher levels.
Seeds, as tiny and
humble as they are,
are a beautiful and powerful
sacred metaphor for life,
consciousness, and the soul.
They are magic, as in the
fabled "Jack and the Beanstalk."
In "Jack and the
Beanstalk," Jack
sells his poor mother's cow
for a handful of magical beans.
This infuriates her,
and she tosses the beans
into the garden.
They grow into a thick stalk
that climbs into the sky.
Jack proceeds to
climb the stalk,
find the land of a giant,
and steal from him.
The giant pursues
Jack, but the boy
is able to scurry down
the stalk fast enough
to chop it down and send
the giant to his death.
Now, there's a lot of esoteric
meaning packed into this story,
including the reference
to the giants,
or Titans, who we
discussed in our episode
about the Titan Prometheus.
The great mythologist and
esotericist Manly P. Hall
once gave a lecture about
the esoteric meaning
of "Jack and the Beanstalk."
He wrote, "In the
allegory of the beanstalk,
Jack is the initiate
climbing towards perfection.
The beanstalk has
two significances.
First, it is the
secret doctrine,
which may grow up to its
fullness in a single night
if that night be regarded
as the duration of the soul
in its mortal state.
The beanstalk is further
symbolic of the soul itself,
up which consciousness
must climb
to discover the divine sphere
from which it was exiled."
So this is Manly P. Hall laying
out the early gnostic teaching
about the soul's ascension.
That teaching says the
soul can grow its way home.
Manly also uses our
magic word-- perfection.
And this is our soul's goal.
Jack's name is derived from the
biblical name Jacob, or Jacob,
who famously wrestled
with an angel at a place
called Pineal, which
rings of pineal,
the gland in the
center of the brain
that some consider
the seat of the soul.
Jacob also scaled the
ladder to heaven at a place
called Luz, a Hebrew word
that means an almond tree.
When it comes to stories
and fables written
in the sacred, secret,
or mystery language,
trees, ladders,
staircases, and the like
often symbolize a spiritual
journey, as well as
the soul's evolution and
progressive development
and unfoldment, or ascension.
Throughout the world,
people ascended
upon trees, poles,
or pillars of wood,
rising to the divine source.
These, of course,
start as seeds.
And the seed is our soul.
Jack's magic beans or seeds like
Jacob's almond hold blueprints
for life, the
process of renewal,
and the seeds of our ascension.
The Jewish menorah, or tree of
light, exemplifies this pillar.
It is connected
to the almond tree
and is known as the
almond tree of light.
A Jewish midrash says,
"And by the Tree of Life,
the souls of the righteous
are going up and down
to heaven and from heaven
to the Garden of Eden,
like a man going up
and down a ladder."
This is an obvious reference
to Jacob's Ladder and points
to the interchangeability of
the Tree of Life and the ladder
symbolism.
They both symbolize the
soul's path to the divine.
At their most basic
level, the seed
is the means by which a plant,
tree, or flower reproduces
itself.
Almonds in particular
are an image
of radical transformation,
which is why the resurrected
or transformed Jesus is shown in
an almond-shaped gate of light,
a stargate, a
portal, often shown
composed of rainbow light.
The gate of light is
actually a mandorla, which
is the Italian word for almond.
The mandorla is
an ancient symbol
of two circles coming together,
overlapping one another to form
an almond shape in the middle.
A symbol is not merely an image.
It is like a door into the
inner world of the soul.
The circles can represent the
sacred and earthly dimensions,
and they meet in the
middle in our soul.
The Western mandorla,
or soul gate,
first appears in
fifth century mosaics
decorating the Church of
Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome.
Jesus and Mary ride
within a blue mandorla
filled with stars, affirming
that this mandorla is
a stargate and containing
other secrets is
the fact that we don't know for
sure where this symbolism came
from.
But it's also found in
Buddhism, where it symbolizes
a luminous ascension cloud.
And we often find
within this cloud
the triple-dot symbol
of the Chintamani.
The Chintamani.
is the symbol for
the light body,
and it's seen here as the
fruit of the mandorla.
In Tibet tradition,
Padmasambhava, the light body
guru, is shown in a
mandorla, symbolizing
the rainbow body of light,
the flower of our soul seed.
So, too, is the
king of Shambhala.
By the sixth
century, the mandorla
had become a standard
attribute of Christ
in scenes of the
Transfiguration,
in which Christ shows himself
to his apostles, transformed
into a celestial appearance,
and the ascension in which
the resurrected Christ
ascends to heaven, and later
in other scenes involving the
resurrected, or celestial,
Christ.
These are all moments of
transcendence and traveling
through time and space.
And it's not just Jesus
who travels this way.
Mary is also shown in
this vessel of light,
as is Francis of Assisi.
Personally, I could look
at these images all day.
They have a vibe about them.
In fact, the almond
itself is the shape
of a vibrating string.
These images are designed to
show the soul at its highest
Earthly vibration.
And by vibing, or resonating,
with these images,
we can become it.
One of the most famous
images of the mandorla,
also known as the
vesica piscis, is
found on the legendary chalice
well in Glastonbury, England.
The early Christians used
this symbol as a method
to describe the coming
together of heaven and Earth,
the coming together of
the divine and the human.
This, by the way, is the origin
of the Christian fish symbol,
but most don't realize
the mandorla is actually
a stargate.
The seed of life
is a modern name
for an ancient geometric
figure and universal symbol
of creation.
Drunvalo Melchizedek
is given credit
for reviving this ancient
knowledge and symbolism
and connecting it to
the flower of life.
I'm often asked
if I have studied
Drunvalo's work on the
Merkaba, and the answer is no.
I made a conscious
decision long ago
to stick with the
original Merkaba
teachers, the ancient
Jewish and Egyptian mystics,
but hope one day to be able
to study Drunvalo's works.
The name "seed of
life" instantly
offers insights and
deeper meaning and purpose
into the symbolism, found at
the heart of the pattern called
the flower of life.
There is an entire
cosmology of consciousness
encoded into this
singular geometric seed.
The seed of life consists
of seven overlapping circles
with the same diameter.
Six of them are regularly
spaced within the seventh,
producing a rosette with 18
lens-shaped petals, six smaller
ones inside the 12 larger ones.
The seed of life is
formed from a relationship
of six circles around one.
And in fact, six
circles will always
fit exactly around a seventh
circle of the same size.
And these seven circles
mirror our chakras and also
the colors of the rainbow body,
as well as the musical scales.
This forms a
foundation upon which
the infinite fractal nature
of life can be understood
and the gate of life opened.
As the seed grows, it
becomes the Tree of Life,
or tree upon which the
soul ascends to heaven.
Thus, the seed is
a perfect metaphor
for the soul and its ascension.
The seed, or
incarnating human soul,
emerges from the spiritual realm
originally and plants itself
in the earthly body
of clay, or DNA,
for the production
of earthly fruit.
As the saying says, it is by
our fruit that we are known.
The worry in our present
age is that the soul seed
can be planted on Earth but
won't be allowed to fully grow.
Instead, it could rot or wither.
And just as the body needs
food, so, too, does the soul.
It craves wisdom,
especially about
the meaning of its existence.
And this is why seeds are the
basis of knowledge and wisdom.
As UCLA scholar Maryanne
Horowitz points out,
"Seminaries, from the Greek
seminarium, or seed plot,
seedbed, or nursery,
are places where
people go for spiritual
education in a seminar,
where seminal, from
the Latin word seed,
ideas are passed
between professor,
who is a tree of
knowledge, and the student,
who is a seed, who is seeking
sapienta, or wisdom, from books
that are called leaves."
People seek to turn over a new
leaf, or nip things in the bud.
We go out on a limb
to seek knowledge.
And finally, after
seeking comes seeing.
And when one sees
the seed, we actually
only see a portion of
what is actually possible
or what is actually there.
But when one learns to see
with the eyes of the soul,
one can see that all
things are possible.
The soul does not see itself
as a divine spark, by the way.
It sees itself as part
of the universal light.
The soul, our soul seed,
knows it has packed within it
the ability to morph into
something beyond what
is immediately recognized.
Think of the acorn and
how encoded within it
is the plan for the mighty oak.
The acorn comes into existence,
lives its life cycle,
and then carries its destiny
forward and becomes an oak.
The acorn has the blueprint
for the towering oak within it,
and the entire tree
was once a tiny acorn
that could fit in the
palm of your hand.
But which came first,
the acorn or the oak?
We all have an
acorn within us that
has a blueprint for
becoming an oak,
or the light body, that is.
This is why Jesus is
covered with acorns
in this transfiguration scene.
As I noted, the seed was
the earliest metaphor
for the Resurrection
of the body.
As a seed is
transformed into a body,
so, too, does our Earthly
body become transformed
into our heavenly light bodies.
The blueprint for this
glory body, or light body,
is within our DNA, awaiting the
moment when a mysterious force
called the last trump, a
Greek word for vibration,
awakens it from its sleep,
and it begins scaling heaven.
In Buddhism, this seed is
called the Adamantine nucleus
of radiant or clear light.
The term Adamantine body
refers to the subtle body,
the light body.
It's also known as the
vajra body, or diamond body.
And again, vajra means
compassion in action.
Growing or revealing this
compassionate body of light
is the great work of Buddhism.
In this way, the seed is
very much like the egg,
the cosmic egg,
which is actually
the feminine counterpart
to the masculine seed.
The masculinity of
the seed is affirmed
in the Greek words that
relate to seeds or sowing--
sporos, sperma, sparrow.
According to the Greek
Stoics, the material spiritual
spermata, or seeds from
the divine, are within us.
Therefore, the seed
is a wonderful model
for soul growth and
spiritual growth.
Stoicism was popular in
Roman Greece around 200 BC.
The principles of Stoicism
were focused on two things.
One, how can we lead a
fulfilling or happy life?
And two, how can we become
better human beings?
They basically said we
have a very short time
while we're here, so let's
not sweat the small stuff.
Time is our most precious
resource, and it's finite.
This provided a sense of urgency
or motivation to their lives.
So they focused on principles.
They viewed challenges as fuel
for the fire of a happy life
and the development
of the light body.
They focused on humility and
self-awareness of our role
in nature.
And they also
emphasized studying
the stories of those who have
been successful in attaining
the light body.
The Stoics believed
the whole universe
was one living being, one mind.
The Stoic belief in the
universe as a living being
and the soul as a seed
or spark of the divine
is referred to explicitly
in Virgil's "Aeneid."
"Thence, man's
race and the beast
and the feathered
creature that flies,
all wild shapes that are hidden
the gleaming waters beneath.
Each elemental seed has a
fiery force from the skies.
Each its heavenly being that
no dull clay can disguise."
So what they're saying is that
living things have within them
a stellar, or star, seed, which
has a fiery force from heaven.
Virgil believed that
when the soul returns
to its original fiery
state, it regains its purity
and becomes godlike.
So the Stoics were the ones
who really brought forward
the idea that we're made
of star stuff, God stuff.
Our soul is a seed.
It's a thought or a
neuron in the mind of God,
and it's all a living thing.
In fact, the Greek word
"conception" refers to an idea
and to the first stage
of embryonic development
when the seed, or sperm,
fertilizes the egg and the soul
steps in.
In a previous episode, we looked
at the Jewish and Christian
idea that the soul,
or seed spark,
enters the womb at the
moment of conception.
Hildegarde's painting shows
this soul, or seed spark,
descending to the Earthly
realm through a tube of light
from the fiery, starry
realm and entering the womb.
The Buddhist tradition also
used seeds to convey teachings.
The first line of the
Dhammapada states, "Our life
is shaped by our mind.
We become what we think."
The idea, or conception, is
that thoughts are conceptions,
are the seeds that give rise to
actions, habits, and character.
In fact, our
character is our soul.
Thus, our thoughts,
our conceptions,
are actually made by the soul.
This is why this Chinese
proverb is so powerful.
"Be careful of your
thoughts, for your thoughts
become your words.
Be careful of your words, for
your words become your actions.
Be careful of your
actions, for your actions
become your habits.
"Be careful of your
habits, for your habits
become your character.
Be careful of your
character, for your character
becomes your destiny."
The author of this Chinese
proverb is unknown,
but it's cosmic.
The seeds of harmful
behaviors lie in the mind.
And Buddhists teach that
with awareness and practice,
we can begin to dig
up undesirable seeds--
jealousy, anger, ignorance--
from our interior garden,
and we can begin to plant new
seeds for a happier picture.
They tell us we can do this by
practicing the six paramita,
or the six perfections,
which are generosity,
giving of oneself,
ethics, patience,
joyful effort, meditation,
and transcendental wisdom.
There's our magic
word again, isn't it?
Perfection.
These six practices
of perfection
are designed to complete
us and to make us
like the immortal holy
ones, or Bodhisattvas,
and the perfected ones of
the rainbow body teaching.
The promise is that with
the right actions, over time
your Buddha nature, your
enlightened consciousness,
expresses itself more fully,
like a blossoming lotus.
This aspect of interior knowing,
which goes by many names--
Christ consciousness,
Messiah, Atma, et
cetera-- is lined within
us like a seed in wait,
like a seed in the ground.
Spiritual practice
nurtures that seed
and causes it to
emerge and blossom.
It seems that part of the
destiny of our generation
of humanity is to bring
the seed-soul metaphor back
into our consciousness.
Today some fear we have
lost our connection
to the life-giving
properties of seeds
as a byproduct of our
highly industrialized
and materialistic culture.
According to author and Sufi
mystic Llewellyn Vaughan-Lee,
we have not only lost the
sacred dimension of the seeds,
but a lived connection to
the sacred Earth, to Gaia.
In "Sacred Seed," a
collection of essays
by religious leaders about the
role of seeds in human life,
he asks, "How can
life have real meaning
if we have no connection
to a sacred Earth?"
The agricultural practices of
genetically modifying crops
and prioritizing monocultures
over multi-crop farming
have made biodiversity plummet
in many parts of the world.
Environmental activists
but Vandana Shiva
wrote, "India once had
200,000 rice varieties
before monocultures took hold."
She continue, "Today the country
grows just eight globally
traded strains of rice."
"When seed is living and
regenerative and diverse,
it feeds the pollinators,
the soil organisms,
and the animals, including
humans," Shiva writes.
"When seed is
nonrenewable, bread
for chemicals, or genetically
engineered, diversity
disappears."
This loss of diversity
and abundance
has a metaphoric
equivalent in human life,
for when seeds
lose their potency,
human beings lose a powerful
symbol of renewal for the soul.
"Seeds are the one thing that
are the only genuine promise we
have of the future," wrote
prominent nun and activist
sister Joan Chittister
in her essay.
"Seeds contain the power of
creation" and, we might add,
the power of the soul.
"In every seed," she
wrote, "is the gift
of life to those
seeking life, wanting
life, denied the kind of
life that is full of energy,
full of hope."
"The Earth shares
that energy with us
by producing the food
our lives depend on,"
wrote Buddhist leader Ogyen
Trinley Dorje, the 17th Karmapa
of Tibet, in his essay.
"It is very important that we
emulate the Earth's attitude
of generosity towards
us," Dorje wrote,
"just as we would do when
receiving a precious gift
from someone we love.
We need to nurture what
we have been given."
So there are several
ways we can begin
nurturing the sacred
power of seeds
right away, according
to Diane Longboat
of the indigenous Mohawk nation,
who suggested that people plant
community gardens and have
purchased foods that haven't
been genetically modified.
My message that I
would add to this
is that if you don't want a
genetically modified soul,
then don't eat
genetically modified food.
Another view is that
planting a garden
is a perfect antidote to
our instant, Wi-Fi world.
Time is the most valuable
commodity we all have.
How much of it we have in
this precious incarnation
is the great question.
Planting and nurturing a
garden takes a lot of time.
It takes patient perseverance,
thoughtfulness, and care.
And that's the point,
because gardening
is a meditation on our soul.
With water, sun, and
soil, a tiny seed
can grow into a majestic
tree, just like our soul.
The seed's power to so
dramatically transform itself
seems almost mythic
in proportion,
which is perhaps
why seeds appear
in so many religious parables.
In one of the
best-known metaphors
in the Gospel of
Mark, chapter 4,
Jesus uses a mustard seed,
a little golden nugget,
to communicate the idea that
a new way of being, what
he called the kingdom of
heaven, or the reign of God,
starts out small and
conspicuous but slowly,
surely emerges into something
dramatically different
over time.
Jesus could be talking about the
soul when he said, "What shall
we say the kingdom of
heaven or God is like?
Or what parable shall
we use to describe it?
It is like a mustard seed,
which is the smallest
of all seeds on Earth.
Yet when planted, it grows
and becomes the largest
of all garden plants, with such
big branches that the birds can
perch in its shade."
The seeds that he
encouraged us to plant
were those of forgiveness,
nonviolence, generosity,
and compassion.
If we live our lives trying
to apply these virtues,
it might not seem like
much is happening.
But with enough patience,
individuals and societies
will become something
they could not foresee.
They will become cultures
that flower from the seed
of the light body.
Can you imagine how
different our world
would be if everyone was
focused on manifesting
their light body and
the rebirth renewal,
regeneration, and
ascension it symbolizes?
This would be a truly
green civilization.
And this is, I say,
why the seed is
the oldest metaphor for the
Resurrection of the body.
Have you ever noticed,
as my wife Clare
did, that the Tree of Life can
be beautifully superimposed
over a photo of the
Shroud of Turin?
In one of the world's
oldest Resurrection stories,
Osiris, the seed, grows into
a tree, the Tree of Life.
In the Osiris legend, Osiris was
induced by his wicked brother
Set to lie down in
a magnificent coffer
under the pretext of
a game at a banquet.
Set and his 72 conspirators
immediately closed the lid
and threw the coffer
into the Nile.
Osiris' wife Isis, who
was also his sister,
searched for and
found the chest, which
had been borne down the Nile
and across the sea to what
was later identified as
the Phoenician coast, where
it was deposited at the
foot of a tamarisk tree.
As this tree grew, it
enclosed Osiris and the chest
within its trunk,
which was later
cut down by the king of
Byblos, or Phoenicia,
and used as a pillar
in his palace.
The fragrance of the pillar
became renowned far and wide.
And when Isis heard
about it, she immediately
understood its significance.
Isis returned the pillar and
the body it contained to Egypt.
Osiris, in his earliest axis
mundi form of a tamarisk tree
trunk, was called Jed.
He is the transformed
man in the tree.
His later mummy
wrappings were symbolic
of his having been encased
inside a tree trunk.
His mummy was therefore an
axis mundi, a Tree of Life,
as indeed were all
future mummies.
Over time, the tree
trunk was replaced
by the imagery of
a pillar, which
became known as the Jed Pillar,
the pillar of stability.
And here, we see the
King Seti offering
linen strips, symbolic of the
light body, to the Jed Pillar.
The story of Osiris
tells us how a seed may
rise to give flower or a tree.
This soul-seed spark may give
rise to a light body as well.
In this way, we may
say that the light body
is the soul's flower.
By what force does a
seed manifest a flower?
Theologians say it's the
same force or power that
allowed a single loaf of bread
to turn into many or water
to turn into wine.
And our soul has
access to that power,
whether it's called
kundalini or the Holy Spirit.
Another viewpoint
is that the seed
stands for a piece of the
larger light body, which must
be matched to its other bits.
In the Jewish
tradition of Kabbalah
the Sefirot, or Tree of
Life, is the spiritual symbol
of the soul.
This Kabbalistic Tree
of Life, featured
in the frontispiece of a
16th century gospel of John,
features lines of
attribution to the body
of Jesus on the pillar of
crucifixion or glorification.
The Tree of Life rises above a
sphere containing the stairway
to heaven, the menorah,
and the starry heavens.
Contained within
the almond shape
is the grail cup,
an atlas upholding
the universe, the pillars Jachin
and Boaz and Jacob's Ladder
going through the sun and
Abraham prepared to sacrifice
his innocent son Isaac.
It also includes the all-seeing
eye and the Horn of Plenty.
The apostle Paul used the
seed metaphor in his letters
to the people of
Corinth to refer
to our angelic life in heaven.
And I'd like to read several
lines from his letter
now, as they speak directly
to the Christian concept
of the light body
in ascension, which
is actually the foundation
for many of today's ascension
theories.
Many people who
discuss ascension today
are actually referring
to these lines,
whether they realize it or not.
As we go, we're going to view
a collection of images of Jesus
with a light body in
the midst of a tree.
I took many of these
photos in England,
where there's a strong
tradition of such imagery.
But we're going to begin
with the 12th century
mosaic in the half dome at
the Basilica of San Clemente
in Rome, where we see the Seed
of Life and the Tree of Life
together.
Notice how the unknown
authors cleverly
place the Seeds of
Life on either side
of an entrance to this portal.
The cross grows as a pillar
from a bush or a tree.
Doves, or souls, ascend the
pillar into an open portal
in the sky.
The apostle Paul begins his
letters to the Corinthians
by saying, "But someone will
ask, how are the dead raised?
With what kind of
body will they come?"
Noting that Jesus
is in a tree wearing
a rainbow-colored cloak,
Paul answers, "How foolish.
What you sow does not come
to life unless it dies.
When you sow, you do not
plant the body that will be,
but just a seed, perhaps
of wheat or something else.
But God gives it a body,
as He is determined.
Into each kind of seed
He gives its own body."
In an extraordinary
statement, Paul next
says, "Not all
flesh is the same.
People have one kind of flesh.
Animals have another, birds
another, and fish another."
Noting once again that
Jesus is in a tree
and wearing a cloak of
stars and sunflowers,
Paul says, "There are
also heavenly bodies,
and there are Earthly bodies.
But the splendor of the
heavenly bodies is of one kind,
and the splendor of the
Earthly bodies is another.
The sun has one
kind of splendor,
the moon another, and
the stars another,
and the stars differ
from stars in splendor."
So Paul is telling us
that the light body
is grown from the seed
of the flesh body.
But this sacred body is
different from our Earthly
body.
"And so it will be with the
Resurrection of the dead.
The body that is so perishable,
it is raised imperishable.
It is sown and dishonored,
it is raised in glory.
It is sown in weakness,
it is raised in power.
It is sown a natural body, it
is raised a spiritual body.
If there is a natural body,
there is also a spiritual body.
And so it is written.
The first man Adam became a
living being, the last Adam
a life-giving spirit.
And the spiritual did not
come first, but the natural,
and after the spiritual.
The first man was of
the dust of the Earth.
The second man is of heaven.
"And as was the
Earthly man, so are
those who were of the Earth.
And as the heavenly man, so also
are those who are of heaven.
And just as we have borne
the image of the Earthly man,
so shall we bear the
image of the heavenly man.
And then Paul delivers the key
to modern ascension mysteries
and also plants the
seed for the belief
in a spontaneous ascension.
"I declare to you," he
says, "brother and sisters,
that flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God,
nor does the perishable
inherit the imperishable.
Listen.
I tell you a mystery.
We will not all sleep, but we
will all be changed in a flash,
in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trumpet.
For the trumpet
will sound, the dead
will be raised imperishable,
and we will be changed.
"For the perishable must clothe
itself with the imperishable,
and the mortal with immortality.
And when the perishable has been
clothed with the imperishable,"
that is, with the light
body, "and the mortal
with immortality, then
the saying that is written
will come true.
Death has been swallowed
up in victory."
It is truly amazing
to me how close
these images of Osiris
and the Jed Pillar
and Jesus on the pillar
of light actually are.
And the victory that we all seek
is not immortality of the body.
It is the ascension of the soul.
And as we will see
in the next episode,
this is the hero's journey.
And we are each the hero, and
by exploring this journey,
we may find our way home.
Until next time, be humble,
and let your light shine.
Namaste.
[THEME MUSIC]